chore: add docs for sending logs and traces from frontend apps (#1767)
SigNoz/signoz.io: data/docs/frontend-monitoring/sending-traces.mdx

---
date: 2025-07-30
title: Sending Traces from your frontend application
id: sending-traces-frontend
---

> This documentation provides a step-by-step guide for sending traces from your frontend application using SigNoz and OpenTelemetry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This documentation provides steps for sending traces from your frontend application to SigNoz.
```

SigNoz natively supports OpenTelemetry for collecting traces, so you can instrument your frontend applications with minimal setup and get deep visibility into user interactions and network activity.

Client side traces help you understand how user actions trigger requests, how long they take, and where latency is introduced, whether in the browser, network, or backend. This gives you a complete picture of user journeys and performance across your stack.

## Prerequisites

> - [SigNoz Cloud](https://signoz.io/teams/) or self-hosted account

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- A web application from where you want to send traces

## Setup

### Step 1: Setup OTel Collector

Install the OpenTelemetry Collector binary using [these instructions](https://signoz.io/docs/tutorial/opentelemetry-binary-usage-in-virtual-machine/). The Collector acts as an agent that receives, processes, and exports telemetry data. It is required to collect data from your application, including traces.

> You would also need to update the collector config to whitelist the frontend domain.

Reviewer: Same feedback as logs.

- **`@opentelemetry/instrumentation`**: Provides the `registerInstrumentations` function that allows you to register multiple instrumentations at once. This is the main API for setting up automatic instrumentation.

- **`@opentelemetry/instrumentation-fetch`**: Automatically instruments `fetch()` API calls to capture spans for network requests. This is crucial for tracking HTTP requests from your frontend to backend services.

- **`@opentelemetry/instrumentation-xml-http-request`**: Instruments legacy XMLHttpRequest calls for older code or libraries that don't use `fetch`. This ensures all network requests are captured regardless of the HTTP client used.

- **`@opentelemetry/context-zone`**: Provides context propagation for browser environments using Zone.js. This is essential for maintaining trace context across async operations and ensuring proper distributed tracing.

- **`@opentelemetry/resources`**: Provides resource attributes that identify your service (like service name, version, etc.). This helps distinguish traces from different services in your SigNoz dashboard.

> - **`@opentelemetry/instrumentation-user-interaction`**: Automatically instruments user interactions like clicks, inputs, and form submissions. This helps correlate user actions with resulting operations and provides insights into user behavior.

Reviewer: Same feedback as logs.

  <TabItem value="npm" label="Npm">
    ```sh
    npm i \
      @opentelemetry/sdk-trace-base \
      @opentelemetry/sdk-trace-web \
      @opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http \
      @opentelemetry/instrumentation \
      @opentelemetry/instrumentation-fetch \
      @opentelemetry/instrumentation-xml-http-request \
      @opentelemetry/context-zone \
      @opentelemetry/resources \
      @opentelemetry/instrumentation-user-interaction
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="yarn" label="Yarn" default>
    ```sh
    yarn add \
      @opentelemetry/sdk-trace-base \
      @opentelemetry/sdk-trace-web \
      @opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http \
      @opentelemetry/instrumentation \
      @opentelemetry/instrumentation-fetch \
      @opentelemetry/instrumentation-xml-http-request \
      @opentelemetry/context-zone \
      @opentelemetry/resources \
      @opentelemetry/instrumentation-user-interaction
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Step 3: Create an instrumentation file

The instrumentation file is required to setup the `OTLPTraceExporter` and `WebTracerProvider` which are used to capture traces within your application and export them to your collector.

> <Tabs groupId="traces-instrumentation">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Tabs entityName="plans">
```

    const exporter = new OTLPTraceExporter({
      url: `https://ingest.<<INGESTION_REGION>>.signoz.cloud:443/v1/traces`,
      headers: {
        'signoz-ingestion-key': <<INGESTION_KEY>>,
      },
    });

    const provider = new WebTracerProvider({
      resource: resourceFromAttributes({
        'service.name': '<<SERVICE_NAME>>',
      }),
      spanProcessors: [new BatchSpanProcessor(exporter)],
    });

    provider.register();

    registerInstrumentations({
      instrumentations: [
        new FetchInstrumentation({
          // Selects which backend servers are allowed to receive trace headers for linking traces across services.
          // Using /.*/ acts as a wildcard. For safer usage in production, replace with specific domains:
          // e.g. propagateTraceHeaderCorsUrls: [/api\.example\.com/, /my-backend\.internal/]
          propagateTraceHeaderCorsUrls: /.*/,
        }),
        new UserInteractionInstrumentation({
          eventNames: ['click', 'input', 'submit'],
        }),
        new XMLHttpRequestInstrumentation({
          propagateTraceHeaderCorsUrls: /.*/,
        }),
      ],
    });
    ```

>   </TabItem>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<TabItem value="signoz-cloud" label="SigNoz Cloud" default>
    ```ts
      import {
        LoggerProvider,
        SimpleLogRecordProcessor,
      } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-logs';
      import { OTLPLogExporter } from '@opentelemetry/exporter-logs-otlp-http';
      import { logs } from '@opentelemetry/api-logs';
      import { resourceFromAttributes } from '@opentelemetry/resources';

      const loggerProvider = new LoggerProvider({
        resource: resourceFromAttributes({
          'service.name': '<service-name>',
        }),
        processors: [
          new OTLPLogExporter({
            url: `https://ingest.<region>.signoz.cloud:443/v1/logs`,
            headers: {
              'signoz-ingestion-key': <your-ingestion-key>,
            },
          })
        ],
      });

      logs.setGlobalLoggerProvider(loggerProvider);
    ```
- Set the <region> to match your SigNoz Cloud [region](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/overview/#endpoint)
- Replace <your-ingestion-key> with your SigNoz [ingestion key](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/keys/)
- <service_name> is the name of your service

</TabItem>

<TabItem value='self-host' label='Self-Host'>
    ```ts
      import {
        LoggerProvider,
        SimpleLogRecordProcessor,
      } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-logs';
      import { OTLPLogExporter } from '@opentelemetry/exporter-logs-otlp-http';
      import { logs } from '@opentelemetry/api-logs';
      import { resourceFromAttributes } from '@opentelemetry/resources';

      const loggerProvider = new LoggerProvider({
        resource: resourceFromAttributes({
          'service.name': '<service-name>',
        }),
        processors: [
          new SimpleLogRecordProcessor(
            new OTLPLogExporter({ url: '<SIGNOZ_COLLECTOR_URL>/v1/logs' })
          ),
        ],
      });

      logs.setGlobalLoggerProvider(loggerProvider);
    ```

- <service_name> is the name of your service
- <SIGNOZ_COLLECTOR_URL> is the url where your collector is running

</TabItem>
```

</Tabs>

Going through each of the 3 instrumentations set up:

- `FetchInstrumentation` – Automatically instruments `fetch()` API calls, capturing spans for each network request made via `fetch`. Supports propagating trace headers to backend services for distributed tracing.

- `XMLHttpRequestInstrumentation` – Instruments legacy XHR-based network requests (e.g., older libraries or custom implementations not using `fetch`). Also adds trace headers to allow backend correlation.

- `UserInteractionInstrumentation` – Tracks meaningful user actions like clicks, form inputs, and submissions. This helps correlate user intent with resulting operations like network requests or page changes.  
  For example, you can trace that a backend request was triggered by a button click.

### Step 4: Importing the instrumentation file

> Import the instrumentation file at the top level of your application.

Reviewer: Same feedback as logs doc.

```ts
import './instrument';
import { StrictMode } from 'react';
import { createRoot } from 'react-dom/client';
import './index.css';
import App from './App';

createRoot(document.getElementById('root')!).render(
  <StrictMode>
    <App />
  </StrictMode>
);
```

### Step 5: Linking frontend traces with backend

> Please follow the guide [here](https://signoz.io/docs/instrumentation/overview/) to setup traces in your backend applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To link your frontend and backend traces, you need to instrument your backend to send traces. Check out this [document](https://signoz.io/docs/instrumentation/overview/) to instrument your backend.
```

> Your frontend traces should automatically get linked with them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once done, your frontend traces should automatically get linked with your backend traces.
```

```ts
import { NodeSDK } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-node';
import { OTLPTraceExporter } from '@opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http';
import { resourceFromAttributes } from '@opentelemetry/resources';
import { getNodeAutoInstrumentations } from '@opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node';

const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  resource: resourceFromAttributes({
    'service.name': '<<SERVICE_NAME>>',
  }),
  traceExporter: new OTLPTraceExporter({
    url: '<<SIGNOZ_COLLECTOR_URL>>/v1/traces',
  }),
  instrumentations: [getNodeAutoInstrumentations()],
});

sdk.start();
```

```ts
app.post('/api/generate-text', (req, res) => {
  try {
    const { length } = req.body;
    if (typeof length !== 'number' || length <= 0 || length > 10000) {
      return res.status(400).json({
        error: 'Invalid length. Please provide a number between 1 and 10000.',
      });
    }
    const generatedText = generateLoremIpsum(length);
    res.json({
      text: generatedText,
      length: generatedText.length,
      requestedLength: length,
    });
  } catch (error) {
    res.status(500).json({
      error: 'Internal server error',
    });
  }
});

> ```

Reviewer: We should not take an example from a particular case. Docs should be kept generic as taking paricular example creates confusion for a user. Since we have told the user to follow the instrumentation docs. We should assume that they will follow the doc and instrument their application themselves. 

We should take this particular example when we want to write a blog for a blog. We can take a particular application not for this doc.

> ### Step 7: Viewing Captured Traces in SigNoz

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 6: Viewing Captured Traces in SigNoz
```

The captured traces can then be viewed in the [Traces Explorer](https://signoz.io/docs/product-features/trace-explorer/).

<figure data-zoomable align="center">
  <img
    className="box-shadowed-image"

>     src="/img/guides/2025/frontend-monitoring/sending-traces/2.webp"

Reviewer: Choose unique and relevant name for image instead of 2.webp

    alt="Viewing Network Calls"
  />
  <figcaption>
    <i>Viewing Network Calls</i>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure data-zoomable align="center">
  <img
    className="box-shadowed-image"

>     src="/img/guides/2025/frontend-monitoring/sending-traces/1.webp"

Reviewer: Choose unique and relevant name for image instead of 1.webp

    alt="Viewing Distributed Traces linking frontend and backend"
  />
  <figcaption>
    <i>Viewing Distributed Traces linking frontend and backend</i>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

> ### Attaching additional identifiers to your Traces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Attaching additional identifiers to your Traces
```

      // This example uses localStorage.
      const userId = localStorage.getItem('userId');
      return {
        userId: userId || '',
      };
    }

    const CustomSpanProcessor = {
      onStart: span => {
        const userData = getUserId();
        const browserInfo = getBrowserInfo();

        span.setAttribute(CONSTANTS.USER_ID, userData.userId);
        span.setAttribute(CONSTANTS.BROWSER_NAME, browserInfo.browserName);
        span.setAttribute(CONSTANTS.BROWSER_VERSION, browserInfo.browserVersion);
      },
      onEnd: () => Promise.resolve(),
      forceFlush: () => Promise.resolve(),
      shutdown: () => Promise.resolve(),
    };

    export default CustomSpanProcessor;
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

Update your instrumentation file to include this processor.

```ts
const provider = new WebTracerProvider({
  resource: resourceFromAttributes({
    'service.name': 'text-generator',
  }),
  spanProcessors: [new BatchSpanProcessor(exporter), CustomSpanProcessor],
});
```

Now every span exported will include these additional contextual attributes.

<figure data-zoomable align="center">
  <img
    className="box-shadowed-image"

>     src="/img/guides/2025/frontend-monitoring/sending-traces/3.webp"

Reviewer: Choose unique and relevant name for image instead of 3.webp

  />
  <figcaption>
    <i>Distributed Tracing</i>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

### Manual Instrumentation

If you need to create custom spans for capture activity, you can do so from any handler function in your code like this.

```ts
const handleSubmit = async (e: React.FormEvent) => {
  e.preventDefault();
  
  const span = tracer.startSpan('generate_text_click');

  try {
    await context.with(trace.setSpan(context.active(), span), async () => {
      const response = await fetch('/api/generate-text', {
        method: 'POST',
        headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
        body: JSON.stringify({ length }),
      });

      if (!response.ok) {
        const errorData = await response.json();
        throw new Error(errorData.error || 'Failed to generate text');
      }

      const data: GenerateTextResponse = await response.json();
      setGeneratedText(data.text);
      setStats({
        length: data.length,
        requestedLength: data.requestedLength,
      });
    });
  } catch (err) {
    setError(
      err instanceof Error ? err.message : 'An unexpected error occurred'
    );
  } finally {
    span.end();
    setIsLoading(false);
  }
};

> ```

Reviewer: This manual instrumentation section is probably applicable for a certain type of front-end application (e.g. a React application), but it might not be applicable for say a Next.js application, a Vue application, a Angular application. So ideally we should not include this section in the doc if it can't be applied for all types of front-end frameworks.

Author: Actually this can be setup in all frameworks. I've changed the function to be more generic so that it is consistent with rest of the doc. Hope that works.

> You can find and try the demo application [here](https://github.com/SigNoz/frontend-monitoring-examples/tree/main/sending-traces)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Demo Application
Check out this [full-stack application](https://github.com/SigNoz/frontend-monitoring-examples/tree/main/sending-traces) that demonstrates sending traces from both frontend and backend to SigNoz.
```
